Add Data Analytics and Backend sections (#5877)
DevExpress/devextreme-documentation: concepts/Common/.NET Backend Solutions/Web API Service (CRUD)/Web API Service (CRUD).md

---
title: Backend Web/REST API for JS Apps with Access Control Rights (Powered by EF Core) 
---

> Your client-side JavaScript (JS) applications may often require an easy-to-setup and secure Web API backend for CRUD and custom operations with a database, authentication and authorization (role-based access control, permission management). To implement such functionality, you can use [DevExpress .NET App Security & Web API Service](https://www.devexpress.com/products/net/application_framework/security-web-api-service.xml). XAF's Solution Wizard includes a "1-Click" solution to create [ASP.NET Core Web/HTTP API services](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403394/backend-web-api-service) (via OData and Swagger/OpenAPI).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Client-side JavaScript (JS) applications often require an easy-to-setup and secure Web API backend for CRUD and custom operations with a database, authentication, and authorization (role-based access control, permission management). To implement such functionality, you can use [DevExpress .NET App Security & Web API Service](https://www.devexpress.com/products/net/application_framework/security-web-api-service.xml). XAF's Solution Wizard includes a "1-Click" solution to create [ASP.NET Core Web/HTTP API services](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403394/backend-web-api-service) (via OData and Swagger/OpenAPI).
```

> Besides DevExtreme UI components, your client-side JavaScript (JS) applications often require an easy-to-setup and secure Web API backend for CRUD and custom operations with a database, authentication and authorization (role-based access control, permission management). To implement such functionality, you can use [DevExpress .NET App Security & Web API Service](https://www.devexpress.com/products/net/application_framework/security-web-api-service.xml). XAF's Solution Wizard includes a "1-Click" solution to create [ASP.NET Core Web/HTTP API services](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403394/backend-web-api-service) (via OData and Swagger/OpenAPI).

Reviewer: Do not start a sentence with `Besides`

> Besides DevExtreme UI components, your client-side JavaScript (JS) applications often require an easy-to-setup and secure Web API backend for CRUD and custom operations with a database, authentication and authorization (role-based access control, permission management). To implement such functionality, you can use [DevExpress .NET App Security & Web API Service](https://www.devexpress.com/products/net/application_framework/security-web-api-service.xml). XAF's Solution Wizard includes a "1-Click" solution to create [ASP.NET Core Web/HTTP API services](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403394/backend-web-api-service) (via OData and Swagger/OpenAPI).

Author: ```suggestion
Your client-side JavaScript (JS) applications may often require an easy-to-setup and secure Web API backend for CRUD and custom operations with a database, authentication and authorization (role-based access control, permission management). To implement such functionality, you can use [DevExpress .NET App Security & Web API Service](https://www.devexpress.com/products/net/application_framework/security-web-api-service.xml). XAF's Solution Wizard includes a "1-Click" solution to create [ASP.NET Core Web/HTTP API services](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/403394/backend-web-api-service) (via OData and Swagger/OpenAPI).
```

[Read Tutorial](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/404449/backend-web-api-service/get-started-with-web-api-service) | [Watch Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T7y4gwc1n4w&list=PL8h4jt35t1wiM1IOux04-8DiofuMEB33G)

![Backend Web/REST API](/images/Common/backend-web-api-article-main.png)

#### Benefits

> - **Powered by Entity Framework Core ORM (EF Core)**    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Entity Framework Core ORM (EF Core)**    
```

> DevExpress Web API Service leverages the functionality of EF Core to implement CRUD operations required for your app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DevExpress Web API Service relies on EF Core to implement CRUD operations required for your app.
```

- **Multiple Authentication Strategies**     

> You application’s authentication mechanism can leverage built-in support for OAuth2, JWT, and OpenID. You can also implement custom authentication.

Reviewer: You've got 2 points here that both use `leverage`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your application’s authentication mechanism can utilize the built-in OAuth2, JWT, and OpenID support. You can also implement custom authentication.
```

> You application’s authentication mechanism can leverage built-in support for OAuth2, JWT, and OpenID. You can also implement a custom authentication strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You application’s authentication mechanism can leverage built-in support for OAuth2, JWT, and OpenID. You can also implement custom authentication.
```

- **IDE Integration**    

> If you work in Visual Studio 2022+ for Windows, integrated Solution Wizard automatically scaffolds your Web Service to speed up application development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you work in Visual Studio 2022+ for Windows, the integrated Solution Wizard automatically scaffolds your Web Service to speed up application development.
```

> Basic functionality of DevExpress Web API Service is available for free. Additional capabilities and services listed below are available as part of the [DevExpress Universal Subscription](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/universal.xml):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Basic functionality of DevExpress Web API Service is available for free. Additional features and services listed below are available as part of the [DevExpress Universal Subscription](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/universal.xml):
```

- Audit trail
- Endpoints to download reports and file attachments
- Data validation
- Localization endpoints that return translated captions for UI elements
- Technical support and full source code

#### Get Started: Add DevExpress Web API Service Functionality

> Refer to the following articles for guidance on how to get started:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the following articles to get started:
```

> - [Predefined Users, Roles, and Permissions](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/119065/data-security-and-safety/security-system/security-object-model/predefined-users-roles-and-permissions): describes how to configure permissions for your ORM data models or your EF Core entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Predefined Users, Roles, and Permissions](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/119065/data-security-and-safety/security-system/security-object-model/predefined-users-roles-and-permissions): describes how to configure permissions for your ORM data models or EF Core entities.
```

- [JavaScript (DevExtreme) Example](https://go.devexpress.com/XAF_Security_NonXAF_DevExtreme_OData.aspx): shows a client-side HTML/JavaScript CRUD app that uses the DevExtreme Data Grid and connects to an OData v4 web service (using the ASP.NET Core Web API).

#### Authorization (Role-Based Access Control)

Web API Service apps ship with built-in Role-based Access Control (RBAC) - a part of the [Security System module](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113366/data-security-and-safety/security-system).

> You can implement access control for object relationships, individual objects, or columns. For example, a user may be able to read the *Name* field, but not be able to modify *Salary*. Use API to check access permissions and customize UI accordingly. For example, you can mask protected editors or disable menu commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can implement access control for object relationships, individual objects, or columns. For example, you can allow a user to read the *Name* field, but not modify the *Salary* field. Use API to check access permissions and customize UI accordingly, for instance, mask protected editors or disable menu commands.
```

> You can implement fine-grain access control for object relationships, individual objects, or columns. For example, a user may be able to read the *Name* field, but not be able to modify *Salary*. Use straightforward API to check access permissions and customize UI accordingly. For example, you can mask protected editors or disable menu commands.

Reviewer: `fine-grain access` Please clarify what this means

Reviewer: What is `straightforward API`?

Author: ```suggestion
You can implement access control for object relationships, individual objects, or columns. For example, a user may be able to read the *Name* field, but not be able to modify *Salary*. Use API to check access permissions and customize UI accordingly. For example, you can mask protected editors or disable menu commands.
```

[Read Tutorial](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/404449/backend-web-api-service/get-started-with-web-api-service) | [Watch Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T7y4gwc1n4w&list=PL8h4jt35t1wiM1IOux04-8DiofuMEB33G)

![Backend Web/REST API](/images/Common/backend-web-api-article-main.png)

#### Benefits

- **Powered by Entity Framework Core ORM (EF Core)**    
DevExpress Web API Service leverages the functionality of EF Core to implement CRUD operations required for your app.

- **Multiple Authentication Strategies**     
You application’s authentication mechanism can leverage built-in support for OAuth2, JWT, and OpenID. You can also implement a custom authentication strategy.

> - **Cross-Platform Compatibility**     

Reviewer 2: Sounds for me like an obvious thing, not like a product feature - any HTTP/Web API can be consumed by different types of clients by design. No reason to highlight this as a feature.

Basic functionality of DevExpress Web API Service is available for free. Additional capabilities and services listed below are available as part of the [DevExpress Universal Subscription](https://www.devexpress.com/subscriptions/universal.xml):

- Audit trail
- Endpoints to download reports and file attachments
- Data validation
- Localization endpoints that return translated captions for UI elements
- Technical support and full source code

#### Get Started: Add DevExpress Web API Service Functionality

Refer to the following articles for guidance on how to get started:

- [Predefined Users, Roles, and Permissions](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/119065/data-security-and-safety/security-system/security-object-model/predefined-users-roles-and-permissions): describes how to configure permissions for your ORM data models or your EF Core entities.

- [JavaScript (DevExtreme) Example](https://go.devexpress.com/XAF_Security_NonXAF_DevExtreme_OData.aspx): shows a client-side HTML/JavaScript CRUD app that uses the DevExtreme Data Grid and connects to an OData v4 web service (using the ASP.NET Core Web API).

> - [ASP.NET Core MVC Example](https://www.devexpress.com/go/XAF_Security_NonXAF_MVC_Core.aspx): shows a server-side ASP.NET MVC Core CRUD app that uses our high-performance DevExtreme-based Data Grid. The demo supports inline data editing.

Reviewer 2: This and the next (Svelte) examples are irrelevant in the context of DevExtreme docs. I would remove them.

- [JavaScript (Svelte) Example](https://community.devexpress.com/blogs/news/archive/2023/04/11/consume-the-devexpress-backend-web-api-from-javascript-with-svelte-part-1.aspx): shows how to build a Svelte app and consume CRUD and custom Web API Service endpoints to authenticate users and protect data, edit and validate data, localize captions, preview and download reports.

#### Authorization (Role-Based Access Control)

> XAF UI and Web API Service apps ship with built-in Role-based Access Control (RBAC) - a part of the [Security System module](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113366/data-security-and-safety/security-system). We recommend that you configure Type, Record, and Field level permissions for different user roles. This way, you implement proper data and UI authorization support (filter sensitive data automatically and authorize CRUD/custom operations).

Reviewer 2: > XAF UI

It's out of the context. We're talking about Web API Service, so let's remove the XAF UI entry.

> XAF UI and Web API Service apps ship with built-in Role-based Access Control (RBAC) - a part of the [Security System module](https://docs.devexpress.com/eXpressAppFramework/113366/data-security-and-safety/security-system). We recommend that you configure Type, Record, and Field level permissions for different user roles. This way, you implement proper data and UI authorization support (filter sensitive data automatically and authorize CRUD/custom operations).

Reviewer 2: > We recommend that you configure Type, Record, and Field level permissions for different user roles. This way, you implement proper data and UI authorization support

It looks like implementation details (low-level) description. Without diving into the product and its API this text is useless.
